**Purpose of Work**

- The purpose of this work is to outline certain aspects of the brain which directly impact the human experience. Many prevailing philosophies came about when knowledge of the brain was largely speculative.

- I believe that psychology can be inferred from brain structure, but brain structure can't be inferred from the brain.

- This work seeks to describe three aspects of the brain which create the greater part of our self experience. A limitation must be acknowledged, which is that it is unclear how brain activity leads to conscious experience.

- Modern neuroscience is busy elucidating the mechanisms of perception, and it must be noted that for all modern advances, we understand very little about how information becomes available to the subjective self. Perception and associative thought form the basis of what we consider thought.

- For the purpose of this work, I will stop short

- Consciousness is a private experiance, and subjective experience can only be investigated by first hand report. The human brain operates on similar principles as the brains of other mammals, with a thinking cortex, a feeling midbrain, and a motivated hindbrain. This is a gross oversimplification, but i believe a reasonable starting point for anyone interested in how the brain creates behavior.

**Sections**

- Introduction

- Cognition (Thinking)

- Emotion (Feeling)

- Motivation (Doing)

- Bonus Topics

**Introduction**

- The brain coordinates behavior in animals. It detects information, predicts outcomes, and selects the optimal action.

  - Detection / Encoding

    - Collects and categorizes information about the environment

    - Encoded as good or bad, fed into prediction machine

  - Prediction / Simulation

    - Generates likely outcomes

    - May be based on internal or external circumstance

  - Action Selection / Motor control

    - Complex movements are encoded in the brain

      - Talking

      - Writing

      - Playing an Instrument

    - Average outcome is weighted by affect

**Cognition**

- Building a thought

  - Information arrives at the brain, via the senses. The brain works like an audio sampler, it captures information and replicates it, with reasonable fidelity. This effectively creates a simulation of the environment, which is available to the sensate self.. Furthermore, it can chop and screw the contents and generate novel scenarios. These scenarios thus have no tangible counterpart.

  - There are perhaps 15 neurons in between the retina and the primary visual cortex, meaning that activation of any of the interneurons could create downstream activity which is identical to afferent sensory activity (i.e. hallucinations and dreams)

- The brain perceives both internally and externally generated activity.

  - Let's start with the perceivable nature of thoughts. I can "hear" or "see" my thoughts, they are available to me. Thoughts are subject to the will, they can be changed or modified. Sensations are not subject to the will, they are generated by forces outside my immediate control.

  - It is typically possible to tell what mental activity is internally generated, and what corresponds directly to external objects or processes.

  - In order to understand an object or a process, one must be able to model it in some way. Understanding implies the ability to explain or demonstrate

  - Perception is the ability to become aware of something. Buddha describes six senses; taste, touch, sight, smell, vision, and thought. I believe that all senses have a similar thought component.

  - Information is detected with sensation, integrated with perception, and manipulated with cognition.

  - Sensation (detecting)

    - Buddha describes six senses, taste, touch, sight, smell, vision, and thought.

    - Stimuli are detected through specialized cells

  - Perception

    - "The ability to become aware of something through the senses"

    - Conscious integration of sensation

    - Thoughts are perceived

  - Cognition (predicting)

    - Cognition is the manipulation of thought objects in order resolve or create

    - The mind can create images and sounds which have no corresponding environmental stimuli

- Types of thought

  - Predicting

    - Prediction is bound to the present

    - An animal able to perceive the world has a marked advantage over an animal which can't perceive the world. Remembering the past and predicting the future has a further advantage.

    - It\'s the prediction of circumstance. (arising of a would-be sensory array)

      - The core of thought is the auto stimulation of the afferent sensory pathways, leading to the generation of a signal similar to that which would arise from a corresponding real world event

## Prediction is the archetypal thought. It is bound to the present moment. Its main function is action selection. It occurs in response to the environment

- To be more precise, it is a prediction of sensory consequences

- It manifests as a partial depolarization of a cortical column, which is compared to incoming sensory information from the thalamus

- The difference between the prediction and the actual sensory experience is predictive error, and the normal thing to do is to adjust either expectations or behavior

<!-- -->

- Remembering

  - Remembering is a byproduct of the development of prediction, as information needs to be encoded and stored in order to be used in a model.

- Imagining

  - Imagining is distinct from both prediction and memory, although it shares many qualities.

**Emotion**

**Motivation**

**Bonus Material**

- Evolution

  - Movement separates animals from plants. Animals use contractile tissue to move around the environment in search of food. Some move blindly, but most pay attention to the environment. Single cells are able to detect light, vibration, temperature, pressure, pH, chemicals, magnetism, using **receptors**.

  - A central function of the nervous system is to generate movement in response to the environment.Neurons use impulses to coordinate movement in animals which are much larger than a single cell. Simple animals could only move towards or away from something, perhaps approach / avoid are archetypal behaviors

  - Simple animals only had to detect the environment. Animals evolved increasingly complex ways to encode and predict the environment, due to selective pressures.

- **Drugs**
