**Purpose of Work**

- The purpose of this work is to outline certain aspects of the brain which directly impact the human experience. Many prevailing philosophies came about when knowledge of the brain was largely speculative.

- I believe that psychology can be inferred from brain structure, but brain structure can't be inferred from the brain.

- This work seeks to describe three aspects of the brain which create the greater part of our self experience. A limitation must be acknowledged, which is that it is unclear how brain activity leads to conscious experience.

- Modern neuroscience is busy elucidating the mechanisms of perception, and it must be noted that for all modern advances, we understand very little about how information becomes available to the subjective self. Perception and associative thought form the basis of what we consider thought.

- For the purpose of this work, I will stop short of attempting to explain experience, but will focus on things that are known to affect experience.

- Consciousness is a private experience, and subjective experience can only be investigated by first hand report. The human brain operates on similar principles as the brains of other mammals, with a thinking cortex, a feeling midbrain, and a motivated hindbrain. This is a gross oversimplification, but I believe a reasonable starting point for anyone interested in how the brain creates behavior.

**Sections**

- Introduction

- Cognition / Cortex

  - Perception

  - Association

  - Prediction

  - Imagination

- Emotion / Limbic System

  - Mind / Body

  - Endogenous Drugs

- Motivation / Reticular Formation

  - Conditioning

  - Action Selection

- Bonus Topics

**Introduction**

- The brain works holistically to create behavior, but it is easier to begin to understand the brain piece by piece. Function is generally localized, lesions and damage to certain areas of the brain produce certain stereotyped defects. However regions of the brain tend to activate each other, so it can be very difficult to determine the precise contribution of certain regions.

  - Damage to cortex -\> difficulty planning, perceiving

  - Damage to limbic system -\>emotional dysregulation

  - Damage to reticular formation -\>

- A train is an apt metaphor. In order to work, the body of the train is required, as well as the tracks, as well as the conductor. The function of each may be separated, but each part is involved in the whole. Brain areas can be

- The brain coordinates behavior in animals. It detects information, predicts outcomes, and selects the optimal action.

  - Detection / Encoding

    - Collects and categorizes information about the environment

    - Encoded as good or bad, fed into prediction machine

  - Prediction / Simulation

    - Generates likely outcomes

    - May be based on internal or external circumstance

  - Action Selection / Motor control

    - Complex movements are encoded in the brain

      - Talking

      - Writing

      - Playing an Instrument

    - Average outcome is weighted by affect

**Cognition (Cortex) - The nature of spontaneous mental activity**

- Mental activity is of two types. The first is generated by external activity, and the second is resultant of internal activity. I will call the first primary activity, and the resultant secondary activity. For example, a loud sound is primary, and the resulting attempts to understand the source are secondary. The brain creates various likely scenarios, and scans the environment in an attempt to confirm these predictions.

- Perception

  - In order for anything to become available to the brain, it must be encoded and interpreted by the senses.

  - Sense organ -\> Thalamus -\> primary cortex -\> associative cortex

  - Information arrives at the sense organ, and is encoded and transmitted to the thalamus

  - The thalamus acts as a gate, which limits the information transmitted to the cortex. During sleep it's closed, and during wakefulness it is selectively open, transmitting what is determined to be relevant based on reciprocal connections with cortex, as well as inherent pre-processing

  - Information then arrives at primary cortex, where stimulus is identified and primarily categorized

- Association

  - From the primary cortex, information is transmitted to associative cortex, where relevant concepts are triggered, in order to put perception into context

  - Each mental concept gives rise to associated concepts, the likelihood of specific co-activations is determined by experience.

- Prediction

  - As related concepts are co-activated, they become perceivable. It's been said that all of our experience is our brain\'s best guess at what\'s happening.

**Emotion - The origin and experience of affective states**

- Mind / Body

- Endogenous Drugs

  - Pituitary gland, thyroid gland, thymus, adrenal / pancreatic, testes / ovaries

  - Amygdala Hijack

    - Stereotyped responses to conditioned stimulus are stored and initiated very quickly after the stimulus is perceived

    - They serve to activate a learned response in less time than would be required to involve consider it

  - Each subjective state has an associated hormonal profile.

  - Emotions exist in order to quickly affect behavior

  - Hormones modulate subjective state in order to guide behavior. They affect metabolism in a way which promotes certain behaviors.

    - The Startle response releases adrenaline and norepinephrine, which increases energy availability muscles, in order to promote the fight / flight response.

  - The areas of the brain which are associated with strong emotions are closer to the body than the area associated with thought. The reason for this is that

- Main Systems

  - Dopamine (SN and VTA)

  - Norepinephrine (LC)

  - Serotonin (RN)

  - Histamine

  - 

**Motivation - The mechanism of goal directed behavior**

- Sense - Recognition - Value Assignment - compare current and goal state - Risk / Reward Assessment - Initiate appropriate behavior

- Motivation is the driving force of goal directed behavior

- Certain categories of mental objects elicit goal directed behavior

- Simple goals are sensory based (Thirsty -\> Find water), but many goals require mental abstraction. These abstractions are goals defined by certain conditions.

- Higher goals in humans can only be met when environmental conditions match cognitive expectations. How we perceive the world is very important to achieving goals.

- In order to move from the current state to the goal state, we must act to alter the environment to match that goal state. For example, if the goal is to be a millionaire, we must change our behavior as well as the environment. Achieving millionaire status is a good metaphor, because it is difficult and achievable. Achieving goals requires breaking large goals down into smaller goal states.

- We engage in behavior if the likely outcome warrants the effort. If we keep our mental goals very big, then the perceived effort is very high, and the likelihood of success is perceived as low. It is no wonder then that there is no motivation to act. The body is conserving resources.

- Motivation is a biochemical process involving the monoamines. In the the body these become hormones and promote the glycogen conversion and ATP production, and prepare the body for action. This response is withheld if the goal is deemed "not worth it"

- If something isn't worth it

  - Metabolically taxing - (Hard work)

  - Unknown intermediate goal state (I Don't know how)

  - Low probability of success (It's not going to happen)

  - Possibility of adverse outcome (What if it goes wrong)

  - Outcome not perceived as beneficial (I don't need it that bad)

- If something is worth it

  - Minimal effort required (it's easy)

  - Clear intermediate goal states (I know how to do that)

  - High probability of success (I can do this)

  - Low possibility of adverse outcome (Nothing bad is going to happen)

  - Perceived as beneficial (I want it)

- Physiological activation is automatic for cases of strong attachment and aversion

  - Humans are primed to seek resources via object recognition, and action selection

- Types of Drives (To borrow maslow\'s hierarchy)

  - Unconditioned (Abstract categories)

    - Physiological needs

    - Safety

    - Community /

  - Conditions(specific goals

    - Be a Doctor

    - Eat chips

- Action Selection

**Bonus Material**

- Evolution

  - Movement separates animals from plants. Animals use contractile tissue to move around the environment in search of food. Some move blindly, but most pay attention to the environment. Single cells are able to detect light, vibration, temperature, pressure, pH, chemicals, magnetism, using **receptors**.

  - A central function of the nervous system is to generate movement in response to the environment.Neurons use impulses to coordinate movement in animals which are much larger than a single cell. Simple animals could only move towards or away from something, perhaps approach / avoid are archetypal behaviors

  - Simple animals only had to detect the environment. Animals evolved increasingly complex ways to encode and predict the environment, due to selective pressures.

- **Drugs**
